Durban - A call to order was the mandate on Saturday as the Umbilo Community Crime Awareness group (UCCA) convened to express their dissatisfaction with certain properties following multiple failed attempts. This comes after the Umbilo and Glenwood community members held a placard protest themed “Metro - You have ONE JOB!” as a means to challenge the municipal department to enforce by-laws, town planning, and zoning regulations. They say that the lack of enforcement from the eThekwini Land Use Management has led to a massive deterioration of property values in Durban, leading to a smaller rates base and less money for service delivery. According to them, the concern is with business people who buy suburban residential properties cheaply because of declining property prices, then convert them into unregistered hostels, guest houses and party venues and that often the businesses are also centres of prostitution and drugs. Gavin Willcocks head of the UCCA said the owners of the properties disregarded the community or neighbours concerns and have taken multiple steps to address this without luck. Niki Moore, convenor and community member said that in addition to noise, most properties operated illegal business activities. “When we call the inspector, he makes a lot of excuses as to why he cannot come, why he cannot find anything wrong with it or he is working on it, but nothing ever happens! The only thing we have been able to do is call SAPS and they come along, tell the people to turn the noise down, and they do so for five minutes and then it goes up again,” she said. She said that some conflicts have been ongoing for years and escalated during the lockdown, with the economy playing a contributing factor. Moore emphasised that it was not a racial issue, but one aimed at establishing mutual respect between neighbours and respecting the law. The municipality spokesperson, Msawakhe Mayisela disputed the allegations that no action was being taken against the violation of its building protocols reported by its personnel and that the city continued to enforce its by-laws on governing buildings and extension of properties. He said that the city was working within the ambit of the law to clamp down on the unlawful conduct. He said that strides were being made to eliminate illicit behaviour, with certain buildings being demolished, while owners of others were fined. Normah Zondo, Executive Director for Corporate Relations at the University of KwaZulu-Natal said that UKZN has leased buildings in Umbilo, Glenwood, Glenmore and Berea. Leased accommodation has Residence Assistants (RA), and Residence Life Officers who ensure the smooth running of each accommodation. “Students who are placed in leased accommodation undergo a selection process and adhere to a strict placement policy,” she added. Sakhile Mngadi, the Councillor for the area, said the concerns brought forward by the community members had been raised in council, committee and with officials in Planning. “Generally the city seems to be struggling to enforce its own by-laws. Concerns raised by me are often ‘processed’ or ‘investigated’ but unscrupulous developers in the area will continue building despite this. The latest is a question regarding a new fast food outlet development and ascertaining information on the approval process etc. the city generally takes forever to respond and one can clearly see there is more at play here,” he said. Mngadi added that the developers who broke by-laws and built these structures must not only be fined, but the buildings needed to be either taken down or converted to acceptable standards at a cost to the owner. Sharing his opinion on the current state of the value of property in the suburbs of Durban, real estate agent, Tyrone Bam, co-owner of Chas Everitt Glenwood, said that there were certain suburbs that have been uplifted and become sought-after again and some not so favourable, which has become an issue resulting in brothels, crime increase and certain unsolicited business activities. “Durban suburbs are a vast area. It’s generally good but more from the government is needed to curb loiters and migrants no matter of creed as this is becoming a massive problem,” he said. He said that more families were moving into Glenwood and Umbilo, and younger generations more so under 40ish, with 50 and up either downsizing or moving upper Glenwood or to Kloof or Hillcrest into complexes for safety and security and less maintenance in a yard. He said that a decrease in value of properties due to various reasons also impacted on the rest of the taxpayers in that area, creating a very negative image of that said area and devaluing their home. “This has a severe financial impact in several ways and has sometimes forced owners with paid up bonds to access to either uplift their home to try get more value or sell as it is even if it is nice and take a loss if that’s the fact at that time, to relocate due to crime or brothels or drug dens,” said Bam. He said that several steps were taken to ensure that the purchase of property was lawful. “We deal with several reputable attorneys and together with us as qualified property practitioners and stakeholders, we collectively ensure ethical practices are adhered to and processes and procedures are aligned with the best for the clients. There are certain codes of practice in our industry and this is not negotiable, to ensure we deliver excellence and a high standard of delivery,” said Bam. SUNDAY TRIBUNE