Durban - Parents of school-going children in KwaZulu-Natal are being hit in their pockets as they prepare for the start of the school year. The large amounts that have to be forked out for stationery, school uniforms and scholar transport will add to the woes of struggling consumers. The National Association of School Governing Bodies and the KwaZulu- Natal Parents’ Association yesterday urged schools to be more accommodating of parents, who were battling financially due to the rising cost of living. According to stationery lists seen by The Mercury for items that must be purchased and supplied by parents, the average cost of stationery for a primary school pupil at a government school was around R1 000, with the cost for a high school pupil rising to more than R2 500. For school uniforms in primary school, the price of a plain school shirt was R165 and pants was R190 for boys, while girls could pay up to R190 for school blouses, R140 for skirts and R255 for plain school dresses. Regarding scholar transport costs, Ntokozo Khumalo, president of the South African Scholar Transporters Association, said the price of fuel remained high and the cost for trips was calculated based on the distance travelled. “We don’t have set amounts for scholar transport, the price varies according to the distance from the area of residence to the school. We can’t enforce rules on transporters. Some of them would charge for a full month in December and January, while some transporters would charge for only half the month as December and January only have two schooling weeks.” Khumalo said, for example, transport from Ntuzuma to a school in Durban North would cost about R830 a month. Matakanye Matakanya from the National Association of School Governing Bodies said the rising costs of sending children to school was concerning. “We can understand the price of uniforms, but the price of stationery is too high. We want to stress that schools should not be forcing parents to buy uniforms or stationery (at specific stores), they need to be more accommodating and allow parents to buy from where they can afford it.” Matakanya added that no school had the right to refuse entry to a pupil who couldn’t afford stationery or uniforms. “If a school pupil is being refused entry, they are welcome to contact us and we will raise the matter.” KZN Parents’ Association chairperson Vee Gani said the cost of educating a child was too high. He added that school fees could range from R3 000 to R12 000, depending on the school. “However, the fact is that pupils have to get an education, they can’t remain at home. “We do, however, call upon schools to be more accommodating if parents can’t afford stationery or uniforms or if they can’t buy from a specific store. Allow them space to buy the stationery and uniforms that they can afford.” Muzi Mahlambi, head of communications at the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Education, said the department did have provisions in place for pupils who could not afford to pay school fees. “We have two types of public schools: fee-paying and no-fee-paying. We have created schools where there are no school fees for pupils who can’t afford to pay fees and in those schools we buy all the stationery for pupils. Parents have the choice to send children to these schools; however, if they don’t we can’t intervene at schools where pupils pay school fees or regulate stationery.” THE MERCURY