Durban —  Poverty is a contributor to poor results in schools, according to KwaZulu-Natal Department of Social Development MEC Nonhlanhla Khoza. In a statement, Khoza said there was a need to end poverty as it also had a negative effect on the performance of pupils at school. The MEC spoke at a handover of a school uniforms programme,  Asibagqokise, in Greytown, KZN Midlands. Khoza said the government had declared war on poverty. “Government is seriously committed to ending poverty. What we are doing today is coming to fruition of the commitment made by this government.  “We are carrying forward the dream of our first democratic president Nelson Mandela. This is just one part of the multipronged approach. This democratic government has declared war on poverty and we will see to it that our children and the population, in general, is free from poverty,” Khoza said. The MEC urged pupils to ‘return the favour’ by ensuring that they gave it their best, studying hard and succeeding. “We’ve come a long way when even the education system was not the same among different race groups. Today opportunities are equal and you must grab them with both hands,” Khoza said. She added that the good results of the school drew the department’s attention. “Results may be good, but poverty from some of the homes where you come from remains a challenge. That is why we are making this intervention so that your schooling will not be disrupted,” Khoza said. Earlier, Khoza made a whistle-stop visit to  Indlovana Primary School on the same programme. Greytown Secondary School’s matric class of 2022 produced  97.4% pass rate, from a total of 156 pupils, with 127 distinctions. Although the school is located in Greytown’s central business district, it has pupils from poor families, with some being child-headed. Principal Siyabonga Sikhosana said the intervention by the government was most welcome as it would help alleviate the plight of poor pupils. “We are happy to see this gesture by the government to assist needy learners. It’s true testimony that this government has made education a priority. We are committed to continue providing quality education to ensure that they produce learners who will be useful and responsible citizens who will contribute to the country’s economy.  “To achieve that, we will achieve a 100% pass rate this year,” Sikhosana said. Meanwhile, on the list of matric pupils who did exceptionally well, predominantly black schools had a number of pupils who received between nine and seven distinctions. Among these achieving high schools were Mevamhlophe, Isicelosetho, Msiyane, Bizimali, Velabahleke and Inkamana. WhatsApp your views to this story 071485 7995 Daily News