Durban - The KwaZulu-Natal Department of Basic Education is optimistic about its state of readiness for the 2023 academic school year, which kicks off tomorrow. While teachers’ unions have raised concerns about some Grade 1 and 8 pupils finding placements, the department said a directive had been issued to ensure all pupils were placed. Thirona Moodley, KZN chief executive of the National Professional Teachers’ Organisation of SA, said that they believed schools were ready to open on time. “Teachers reported to schools today (yesterday). We are concerned that there may be a large number of parents who have not registered their children for the academic year. Parents who are turned away ... due to the school having reached its capacity must report to the department’s district office for assistance.” SA Democratic Teachers Union (Sadtu) provincial secretary Nomarashiya Caluza said yesterday was the first day mainly for teachers to complete planning. “As Sadtu KZN we’ve been monitoring, and the reports are that its all systems go, except for a few schools that experienced break-ins, (such as) Thembalethu High in Kokstad and a few others.” Caluza said some parents were still looking for spaces for their children, something that was supposed to be done last year. “We appeal with schools to not turn away children if they have space.” Matakanye Matakanya, National Association of School Governing Bodies general secretary, said they were pleased schools were reopening at the appointed time. “We have had two school years, 2021 and 2022, where the start of the school year was affected by the Covid-19 pandemic. We are very pleased that schools are opening at the scheduled time.” Matakanya said they were concerned that not all Grade 1 and 8 pupils had found placement. “We have two concerns in respect of this. The first is that some learners that have not found placement in schools will start missing out on school work. We hope that pupils who missed out on school work will be assisted by teachers to catch up. “We want to stress that if pupils have not found placement, it is the responsibility of the National Department of Basic Education to ensure that all pupils are placed in schools. If for some reason pupils find themselves not able to find school placement after requesting help, they are welcome to contact us and we will raise the matter.” Department spokesperson Muzi Mahlambi said they were happy with the state of readiness of schools for the 2023 academic year. “We are pleased that we have managed to deliver stationery to all schools that fall under the category of schools that don’t pay for school fees. The only exception is schools that have been vandalised, who have told us to delay the delivery of stationery. “However, we are confident that even in those schools the latest delivery of stationery will be received this morning (Monday). Schools have also been informed where necessary to allow pupils to collect stationery before the start of school.” Mahlambi said that parents whose children had not been placed needed to contact the department’s circuit or district offices. THE MERCURY