Durban - The eThekwini Municipality funeral assistance policy has again come under intense scrutiny after it emerged that financial assistance had yet to be provided to the family of a late city councillor, months after the death. The municipality has been tasked by opposition parties to urgently finalise the review of its policy, which is meant to standardise the assistance it offers in the event of a funeral of one of its residents, amid concerns that it is being applied unfairly. The matter came up as the city’s executive committee processed a report regarding the assistance that it offered for the funeral of prominent Durban artist Mandla “Mampintsha” Maphumulo who died late last year. The municipality offers burial assistance to residents who are indigent or are prominent individuals who have contributed positively in the city. However, the municipality is under pressure to standardise the policy in order to have uniformity in how it responds to such matters. Last year the policy came under fire after three former councillors died, but their families were offered different amounts. One councillor was from the ANC and her family received more financial assistance, which led to accusations that the party was prioritising its members. “We need to process and finalise the issue of this funeral policy,” said DA councillor Thabani Mthethwa, adding that they had always found it difficult to speak on the policy publicly out of respect for the families of the deceased. “I speak on this issue painfully because the family of one of the longest serving members of this council, Tex Collins, has not been paid. I am talking about a man who is a former member of this council, that is very painful,” he said. Mthethwa said the manner in which city officials were processing this assistance was concerning. “The family is saying city officials have been asking the family for an extensive list of details that they have not normally asked for before.” Speaking on the contribution the city made for Maphumulo’s funeral, ANC councillor Nkosenhle Madlala said the city had co-ordinated with another government department on the funeral expenditure. He said because Maphumulo was a public figure, the Durban International Convention Centre (ICC) was selected as the venue for the funeral and the ICC charged about R250 000. He said the city contributed R100 000 while the rest came from the provincial government. He said government funding did not include money for catering. Regarding the Collins matter, he said it was shameful that the family had been treated in this manner and suggested that the executive committee should write a letter to apologise. THE MERCURY