Durban - The Congress of South African Trade Unions (Cosatu) has called for the naming and shaming of companies that do not pay the minimum wage to their employees.  The labour federation said this on Tuesday in a statement. It said according to its information the National Minimum Wage (NMW) Commission had recommended a CPI (consumer price index) plus 2% increase for this financial year. Cosatu spokesperson Sizwe Pamla said while the labour federation had proposed a CPI plus 3% increase, they found the commission’s recommendation acceptable and reasonable as it would provide significant relief to more than six million workers earning within the range of the national minimum wage. Pamla cited workers in the farm, domestic, construction, retail, hospitality, transport, security, and cleaning services sectors as major beneficiaries of the move. “The NMW commission has asked for public comments until January 13, 2023, and we will be making our submission to support the commission’s recommendation and push the commission to finalise its proposals to the minister of Employment and Labour. We expect the minister to move with speed to announce the final increase and to ensure that it comes into effect by March  1, 2023. Workers cannot afford any delays,” Pamla said. He pointed out that since the national minimum wage came into effect in 2019, the labour federation had raised it from R20, and was optimistic that it would soon pass R26 an hour.  According to Pamla, the government needed to closely monitor the conduct of employers. “Whilst we have made progress on this front, it is critical that the Department of Labour cracks down on those employers who ignore the national minimum wage. Equally, we expect unions across the board to work together to expose such employers, and organised business, too, must play its part,” the spokesperson said. He expressed the labour federation’s reservations over the failure by some employers (35%) to comply with the national minimum wage, calling for tough measures against them.  “This matter should be treated with the seriousness it deserves. These employers cannot be allowed to behave like they are above the country’s laws and treat their employees like glorified slaves,” Pamla said. THE MERCURY