Durban - A bloc of smaller parties which are in a coalition agreement with the ANC have resolved to put forward the name of councillor Zandile Myeni from the National Freedom Party (NFP) for the position of deputy mayor of eThekwini. The bloc met yesterday to consolidate their positions in preparation for the special council meeting today to fill the position of deputy mayor, council whip and an executive committee member. While Myeni had been considered the front-runner, it emerged yesterday that there were other contenders, including councillor Lwazi Nkomeni of the African Transformation Movement (ATM) and councillor Muzi Hlengwa of African People First (APF). However, after the meeting councillors from the bloc said they had resolved to support Myeni. The position of deputy mayor became vacant last year following the ousting of Abantu Batho Congress (ABC) president Philani Mavundla who had been the deputy mayor on the ticket of the bloc of smaller parties as part of the coalition agreement with the ANC. Mavundla had a public fallout with the mayor, Mxolisi Kaunda. African Democratic Change (Adec) councillor Visvin Reddy, who was part of the meeting, said the bloc had resolved to support Myeni. He said that as Adec they supported Myeni because they believed the city was in need of a mature individual who was hard working and would be able to deliver for the city’s residents. “We believe she has those qualities. What we have also made clear is that the position of the deputy mayor is a bloc position, and should we not be happy with her performance, we reserve the right to recall her,” said Reddy. Nkomeni also said the bloc had agreed to put Myeni’s name forward. “The parties met and analysed all our strengths, they resolved that I was good at negotiating with the ANC, Hlengwa was good at leading the councillors who are part of the bloc, and Myeni was good at leading the bloc, so it was agreed without any dispute that she should be put forward for the position. “After Mavundla, it could have been the end of the bloc, but she managed to lead it and keep it together. She is a very smart leader who knows how to get work done. Even if there are political disputes, she will not let those undermine the work that must be done for the people of eThekwini. “She is also good in that she considers the view of the other members of the bloc and takes them into account.” The NFP’s Canaan Mdletshe said: “If our councillor is elected the deputy mayor, it would be great for the city, and the residents because we believe it would bring about much-needed stability within the leadership of the city. Myeni is a workaholic and a committed servant of the people.” DA councillor Thabani Mthethwa said they would not be supporting anyone who had been backed by the ANC. THE MERCURY