Durban - The eThekwini metro police unit is looking to recruit 200 new officers as it builds up its numbers to improve its capacity to police the city. The deputy head of metro police, Sbonelo Mchunu, said the intention was to have at least 6  000 metro police officers by 2028. “We are looking to close the deficit. We were supposed to have 5  000 metro police by 2010, we are at 2  500 at the moment,” said Mchunu. He said the recruits would first be trained as authority officers dealing with by-law enforcement, and they would thereafter be trained in law enforcement which would include SAPS training. “Going forward we are looking to recruit about 500 metro police each year in order to reach the capacity of 6  000 at least by 2028. We are looking to boost our capacity to police from oThongathi to uMgababa and inland to Hammarsdale,” he said. Mchunu also touched on law-enforcement operations this festive season, saying they went well. A metro police law and traffic enforcement report showed that there were 26  964 traffic-related offences, 3  857 by-law offences, 12 vehicles impounded, 215 people arrested, 132 motor vehicle incidents attended to, and 300 vehicles searched. Giving an update on the conditions on the road, the KwaZulu-Natal MEC for Transport, Community Safety and Liaison, Sipho Hlomuka, said he was satisfied with the decrease in road crashes and fatalities during the festive season. Hlomuka said the province was taking stock of the performance of the enforcement operations for the festive season and was pleased that the preliminary reports suggested a decrease. He said more than 88  502 vehicles were stopped this festive season and more than 10 730 charges were meted out against road users who violated traffic regulations. Hlomuka commended the law-enforcement agencies, saying their visibility and commitment had yielded positive results. “While we are at a preliminary stage of the assessment with our performance, all indications are pointing to a decrease in both crashes and fatalities. “We are, however, not taking our eye off the ball as our enforcement teams are still monitoring the movement on the road. Our plan is to monitor all road networks until the schools are opened,” said Hlomuka. THE MERCURY