Durban - Teacher unions have called for better security at schools after the principal of a Newcastle high school was attacked in his office on Wednesday. KwaZulu-Natal Department of Basic Education spokesperson Muzi Mahlambi said the principal of Indonsa Technical High School in Osizweni township in Newcastle was shot at three times, but survived. “The KZN Department of Education can confirm that the principal of Indonsa High School in Newcastle was this morning attacked by gunmen in his office. He was shot at three times but all three bullets missed him. He has been rushed to hospital for trauma treatment,” said Mahlambi. Thirona Moodley, of the National Professional Teachers' Organisation of South Africa (Naptosa), said violence in schools had become rampant and it disturbed teaching and learning.  “It is unfortunate that our teachers and principals are victims of crime inside the school. We call for the protection of teachers and learners during school hours, we also call the community to protect and call out the perpetrators who are behind these acts,” said Moodley. Moodley said as a union, they had approached the department many times about violence in schools and asked them to increase and improve security in schools. “Violence in schools has been escalating. Our schools have become a playground for thugs and criminals. There must be a partnership between schools and communities to curb these incidents. The department cannot do this by themselves, we have called for the department to improve the security in our schools, but nothing has been done. “Law enforcement must be visible around the schools. If the SAPS did surveillance it would be effective, as criminals enter our schools because they know the police will not respond instantly,” Moodley said. National Teachers’ Union general secretary Doctor Ngema said it was shocking that a principal could be attacked inside a school premises. “We are worried about what is happening in the country that makes our teachers and school managers targeted. We are, however, consoled by the fact that the principal, fortunately, survived the attack. “There is a need for the department to protect the teachers, learners and schools because schools are government institutions like clinics, hospitals and Home Affairs. We also call for more well-trained security guards to be employed and equipped,” Ngema said. THE MERCURY