Durban — Private security officers arrested a robber who had shot dead the passenger of a car that had run out of fuel on the N2 in KZN on Saturday. Private security firm Reaction Unit SA responded to the scene and spokesperson Prem Balram said Rusa arrested a murder suspect who was linked to a spate of robberies and attacks on stranded motorists. Police had not commented by the time of publication. Balram said that it was established that the deceased and his cousin were travelling in a silver Opel Corsa from Ballito to Durban when their vehicle ran out of fuel. “They were stationary in the emergency lane awaiting assistance when they were confronted by two suspects who attempted to rob them. One of the suspects was armed with a firearm. The driver drew his pistol and both parties exchanged shots.  “The passenger was shot in the chest. Both suspects fled into a dense bush along the highway. The driver received assistance from another family member who they contacted earlier.  “They fuelled up their vehicle and drove appropriately one kilometre from the scene of the shooting before contacting authorities,” Balram said. He said that after interviewing the surviving victim, reaction officers returned to the scene of the shooting and entered the bush into which the suspects had fled. “After a brief search, a 9mm Vector pistol and a red Kappa baseball cap were recovered. Officers continued searching the dense vegetation and eventually tracked and apprehended one of the perpetrators. The Inanda resident was shot in both legs,” Balram said.  “He is believed to be linked to several murders and attacks on motorists who experienced mechanical failures on that particular stretch of road.” Medi Response spokesperson Paul Herbst said: “Advanced life support interventions were initiated on the patient but unfortunately he succumbed to his injuries. “We caution the public to exercise extreme caution on both the N2 and M4, between the north coast and Durban.” Commenting on Facebook, Wahed Nazeer said: “My cousin got killed there last week Monday. SAPS never bothered to search in da bushes. Well done Rusa for capturing my cousin’s killer.” Ntombi Yebhaca said the suspects killed a colleague three months ago when their car broke down on the same road. “I will contact his family to reopen the case for further investigation.” Daily News