Durban - Transnet says steps are being taken to tackle a truck backlog at the Richards Bay port that led to congestion on the N2 leading to Richards Bay last week. Last week, “The Mercury” reported on the several kilometres of trucks seen on the N2 heading to Richards Bay. In response to questions, Transnet said that during the festive season, it along with the City of Umhlathuze made the decision to minimise trucking operations  to accommodate the high volume of tourists, visitors and holiday activities at time. Transnet added that therefore during the festive period only planned trucks were allowed to travel to the Port of Richards Bay, leading to a backlog.  “The embargo was communicated to the customers to stop loading from the 15th of December 2022 to the 5th of January 2023. This embargo caused a traffic system imbalance when trucking operations resumed during the first week of January.” Transnet said that in order to combat truck congestion in and around the Richards Bay port, it has implemented a colour coding truck calling process and added staging areas inside the terminals.  “Trucks are dispatched with a sticker on a window screen to identify which area/vessel they are destined for. There are also additional staging areas that have been operationalised inside the terminals. The port has also beefed-up offloading capacity by deploying additional resources to avoid any further congestion.” Transnet added that at the staging areas, personnel are also in constant communication with each truck’s supervisor via a two-way radio.  “There is also constant negotiation with customers to deploy marshals that will assist in directing the traffic. In a case where a truck arrives in Richards Bay without a permit, they are reported to the road traffic department and a fine is issued. A medium-term solution to the issue has triggered an establishment of a multi-stakeholder task team, comprising of Transnet, the City of Umhlathuze, KZN Department of Transport (RTI), SANRAL, key customers, cargo owners, and trucking companies which will meet on a biweekly basis.” Transnet said that they are urging members of the public to be patient.  “The committee will look at a synergetic system that ensures that there is alignment between all affected stakeholders.  “An additional team has also been established, and its specifically tasked with the operational output in as far as streamlining the movement and offloading of the trucks coming to the port.” THE MERCURY