Durban - New demands from its coalition partners and concerns about it giving away its control are just some of the problems that have besieged the ANC in eThekwini Municipality and led to the collapse of a special council meeting yesterday. “The Mercury” understands that the bloc of smaller parties, which is in a coalition agreement with the ANC, is flexing its muscles and has made new demands, including for a closer working relationship with the ANC and a “say” in the filling of senior leadership vacancies in the council to ensure the positions go to eligible candidates. The special council meeting, which was meant to elect a deputy mayor and fill two other positions – council whip and an executive committee (exco) member – collapsed when the ANC and its coalition partners failed to arrive on time at 10am. The bloc was apparently meeting the ANC’s provincial leaders while the regional leaders were meeting the municipal manager, Musa Mbhele, regarding service delivery matters. The meeting was called off at 11am. The ANC members only arrived at the venue at 11.30am. Council rules dictate that if a meeting fails to start 30 minutes after its scheduled time, it must be called off. The collapse of the meeting sparked outrage among the opposition benches who viewed it as a deliberate attempt to sabotage council business. They accused the ANC of disrespecting ratepayers and described the party’s failure to attend the meeting as a waste of council resources, stating that such meetings at the Durban ICC cost the municipality about R500 000. A member of the bloc, African Democratic Change (Adec) councillor Visvin Reddy, said they had held a meeting with the ANC. “We communicated that we want the leadership of the municipality to be accessible to councillors of the bloc. We want a closer and more formal relationship with the ANC so that we are able to table the concerns that are in our communities,” he said. He said as part of a closer relationship, the bloc had proposed regular meetings with ANC leaders. “The bloc does not want to be voting fodder for the ANC, we do not want the party to come to us when it needs votes. We want to see CVs of individuals being appointed to fill senior posts to see if they are fit and proper for the post.” He said the ANC had promised to give them the names by Thursday. An ANC councillor, speaking on condition of anonymity, said he was not aware of the terms that had been negotiated by the province. “The province met with the bloc to verify whether the agreements that were made while Mavundla (ousted former deputy mayor Philani Mavundla) was still there still stood, or if they wanted to change some of the terms. “Another issue that the province needed to verify was whether the bloc still had the numbers or whether people had left with Mavundla. That is something that we could not take for granted because it doesn’t only affect the voting that was to take place on Thursday, but all the decision that have to be taken.” The councillor confirmed that there was discomfort in the ANC again giving away its exco seat. He explained that if the deputy mayor post was given to a smaller party that did not have a seat on the executive committee, then the ANC would have to give up one of its exco seats to allow the deputy mayor to be elected. “That is natural (not wanting to give the seat away), but we did not win control of the municipality so naturally we have to give away something.” Another source agreed that there was an issue with giving the exco seat up as it could lead to a situation where the deputy mayor did not vote with the ANC on exco resolutions, as had happened previously with Mavundla. ActionSA councillor Zwakele Mncwango said the ANC must be taken to task over the council meeting fiasco. “What they have done today is an insult to ratepayers. I think it’s up to the residents to punish the councillors of the ANC. We are engaging with other parties because we must see what we do moving forward because I think there is space for legal processes,” he said. IFP councillor Mdu Nkosi said since he became a councillor in 2006, he had never seen the majority party not arrive for a meeting. “This is a huge embarrassment, it means that the division within the ANC are so huge that they forgot about the people of eThekwini.” DA councillor Thabani Mthethwa said a serious concern was that Mbhele did not turn up for the meeting as it appeared that he was being drawn into ANC factional politics. Speaker Thabani Nyawose said he would engage with the parties on why they were late for the meeting. When asked why the city manager was not part of the meeting, he said his office had not been able to reach him. ANC councillor Thembo Ntuli said the allegations that there was dissent inside the party were not true. He said the party had been late to the meeting because it had been dealing with pressing service delivery matters. When asked about the demands made by the bloc of smaller parties, ANC provincial spokesperson Mafika Mndebele said they were finalising negotiations. The city said the meeting would be reconvened in the next seven days. THE MERCURY