A Durban mother who unexpectedly gave birth outside the gates of Savannah Park Clinic, near Pinetown, has praised the municipal health facility’s nursing staff for their compassion and quick thinking after they came to her rescue to make sure her baby was safe after delivery. Thembisa Khanzi, 38, gave birth to a healthy baby boy outside Savannah Park Clinic on January 14. The mother of three told The Mercury yesterday that she would always be indebted to the nurses who attended to her outside the clinic’s gates. Khanzi said she started experiencing labour pains late in the day on January 13, and decided that she would go to the hospital the next day. Accompanied by her boyfriend, Khanzi said she initially wanted to go to RK Khan Hospital in Chatsworth, but the labour pains intensified while she was in a taxi. “I had labour pains all morning and it was unbearable. I wanted to go to RK Khan Hospital, but as soon as my waters broke, the taxi driver said he could not take me there because he was scared I might give birth inside his taxi,” Khanzi said. She said the taxi driver stopped to allow her and her boyfriend to get out. She added that as she alighted from the taxi, she felt the baby coming. “When I stepped outside the taxi, the baby came and my boyfriend was there to make sure the baby was not hurt. “Everybody was shocked and those outside the clinic wanted to help me. Luckily a nurse came to my aid as soon as they were alerted and cut the umbilical cord and gave me a wheelchair,” she said. She said she and the baby were then transferred to RK Khan Hospital. Khanzi said the nurses at Savannah Park Clinic made sure her baby boy, whom she named Sinothile, was in no danger after his sudden entrance into the world and she was very grateful. “I am thankful to the nurses at Savannah Park Clinic; they did not ask any questions, they just helped me and left everything they were doing. I am still in touch with them and I will never forget what they did for me,” she said. Londiwe Zwane, one of the two nurses who helped Khanzi, said that on that day they had been short-staffed but they were glad they had been able to help a woman in need. “It was in the morning when two people came to us running, saying somebody just gave birth at the clinic’s gate. I ran quickly and attended the scene and arrived with equipment and cut the umbilical cord,” Zwane said, adding that they were only doing their jobs. Nelisiwe Dlamini, a senior manager at the clinic, said while the clinic did not handle births, they were able to manage the situation. “The baby is okay, we were able to help both the mother and baby which was the most important thing,” Zwane said. THE MERCURY