Durban — Noxolo Mathula, who plays the role of “Lilly” in the SABC soapie Uzalo has revealed her other ‘out-of-TV passion’.  Mathula sells hotdogs around the Durban taxi rank to supplement her television earnings if she is not filming her Uzalo shows. She has become a household name for multitude of television show lovers throughout the country. Mathula said she is not ashamed or embarrassed of being a TV personality selling food in the street. “I am never ever ashamed. My mother taught me that you do not ever feel embarrassed by doing honest work. If it gives you money and brings you happiness, then there’s nothing to be ashamed of. It is my side hustle, I own it, and no one can tell me anything. It is a brand I am very proud of. I can never be ashamed of it,” she said. For her, it is a win-win situation, because people get to see the television star while they also buy her product and get to take a photo with Lilly. “People do not usually get to see celebrities doing the groundwork. For them it is also an inspirational thing that ‘haybo Lilly, uyi-celebrity and you are out here in the street selling hotdogs’. And I say we all have to hustle because depending on one salary does not work.”Mathula said She says with the South African economy being at such a critical point, it is very important to have multiple streams of income. She encourages other celebrities to push their side hustles while they are still relevant. “Do it while you are still on TV. People do not get to see their favourite celebrities all the time. When people see you on TV, they want to see you in real life too. To some of them you are a role model and others look up to you,” she advised. Dancer and performer Zodwa Wabantu once posted an image of herself standing with a trolley full of vegetables and wrote that she is street smart and sells onions on the street. She’s sold eggs amongst other items. Entrepreneur Sbusiso “DJ Sbu” Leope was also seen using this marketing tool to promote his energy drink business. Daily News