Durban - ANC members and leaders in KwaZulu-Natal need to remember the importance of working with other provinces, and making compromises when necessary in order to remain an influential bloc in national politics. This was the view expressed by a number of members attending the hybrid ANC national elective conference at the Durban Exhibition Centre yesterday. The conference had to be postponed last month due to delegates being unable to complete the programme. The conference resumed yesterday in a hybrid format – with delegates joining from different provinces. The gathering, which was attended by a number of leaders, including former president Jacob Zuma, Dr Zweli Mkhize, Nathi Mthethwa and Malusi Gigaba, will continue today ahead of the party’s January 8 celebrations at the Petrus Molemela Stadium in the Free State this weekend.   Many delegates attending yesterday, said they had not forgotten how KZN, which boasted the largest delegation at the elective conference in December and fielded three candidates for the positions of president and secretary-general, returned home empty-handed.   The members, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said this should be a lesson for the future for KZN, which is losing its kingmaker status in the governing party. Party members across regions have cited divisions and lack of political foresight as two of the reasons KZN suffered the setback of having no representation in the party’s top leadership structure, just as happened at the 2017 elective conference.   A delegate from eThekwini region, said one of the harsh lessons learnt by the province was to show willingness to engage with other provinces without being seen as bullying them. “It used to be the case that we would work with the Eastern Cape and the Western Cape provinces when attending national conferences, forming an influential bloc, and this always gave us the edge when it came to contests,” said the delegate. The approach, according to the ANC member and delegate, worked over the years, and ensured that KZN was respected by other provinces.  This, the member pointed out, was reflected by the number of provincial leaders who occupied senior positions in government during the Nelson Mandela and Thabo Mbeki eras. However, the massive growth in membership numbers, especially during the Zuma years, according to some of the members, also brought with it a level of arrogance from some. “The fact of the matter is that with more members, and younger leaders, there were other qualities that got dumped by KZN, and unfortunately are coming back to haunt us,” said another delegate. He cited lack of political maturity as one such feature, which also resulted in the province becoming alienated. “Sometimes getting a position that you have been campaigning for does not amount to winning a conference, and that was something that was understood quite well by comrades. It is clearly something that many of us need to be reminded about,” the ANC member added. Many members said the current leadership should seek advice from the elders in order to restore the ANC KZN’s stature, and ensure that it regains trust and respect from other provinces. “Look at Gauteng, when one of the leaders made a statement that was offensive to another province and its leadership, he quickly withdrew it and apologised for the remark and that gesture strengthened the province’s position. There is a lesson there for KZN,” the ANC member observed. The long-standing member said advice and counsel for the leadership should come from all quarters in order to defeat the perception of tribalism. Many party members said they would take their marching orders from President Cyril Ramaphosa when he delivers the January 8 statement, as he had been democratically elected at the conference. The conference yesterday experienced delays owing to accreditation processes for members, and is set to continue today, with reports from commissions which will be formulated into conference resolutions and form part of the governing party’s programme of action for the next five years. Among the resolutions that KZN has been pushing for is the nationalisation of the South African Reserve Bank and the review and possible scrapping of the controversial step-aside resolution. ANC KZN spokesperson Mafika Mndebele said they were pleased with yesterday’s attendance. THE MERCURY