Durban - The next deputy mayor of eThekwini could emerge from the bloc of smaller parties that are in a coalition agreement with the ANC to govern the municipality. “The Mercury” understands that NFP councillor Zandile Myeni is the front runner for the position which became vacant late last year after the sacking of deputy mayor Philani Mavundla. However, Myeni’s ascendancy to the position could be disrupted by other political developments which include the negotiations between the ANC and the EFF at national level. Mavundla’s chances of returning to the post were dashed after a court dismissed his application to challenge his removal. The court found that the municipality had complied with all the legal processes when it ousted him. Mavundla had previously stated in the media that his agreement with the ANC would last until the next local government elections and he vowed to fight to enforce that agreement. However, in a statement, his Abantu Batho Congress (ABC) party said it accepted the court outcome, saying that Mavundla was ready to assume his new role in the opposition. It was not immediately clear whether Mavundla would be in the opposition as part of the bloc of smaller parties. The NFP’s Canaan Mdletshe declined to speak about Myeni being appointed as deputy mayor, but said there were ongoing negotiations which could see the next deputy mayor emerging from the bloc of smaller parties. “Remember that Mavundla had come from the bloc and we believe that the next deputy mayor will come from it. The relationship between the bloc and the ANC is very mature and it matures with every engagement,” said Mdletshe. He added that the bloc of parties was aware of engagements between the ANC and the EFF which could have an  impact on the negotiations between the ANC and the bloc. “The situation is slightly dicey considering the fact that there is this relationship between the ANC and the EFF. But we must emphasise that as the NFP we are not power hungry. What is important to us is to see stability in the council and residents getting service delivery,” he said. African Transformation Movement councillor Lwazi Mbele said the relationship with the ANC was strong and the coalition was likely to continue, adding that an emergency meeting with the ANC before Thursday to determine who would replace Mavundla was on the cards. “I do not believe Mavundla will leave the bloc, even if he does remember there are many smaller parties in the council and so that will not have any impact on the numbers. So when we meet with the ANC, it (the meeting) will most likely determine who should replace him as deputy mayor and who will take over as the chairperson of the human settlements and infrastructure services committee,” he said. African Democratic Change councillor Visvin Reddy said changes were needed to save the city from the current morass and competent leaders should be deployed to key portfolios to turn the municipality around. “The removal of Mavundla was the first step in taking control of a key portfolio that is important to service delivery in the city. Mayor Mxolisi Kaunda will have to go. “As the political head he will have to take full responsibility for the decay and decline of standards in eThekwini. “The ANC will have to sacrifice its biggest fish to show that it means business,” Reddy said. The ANC would have to choose its most capable councillor or bring in someone that could turn the tide in the portfolio that had been beset with challenges including waste removal, water and sanitation, poor housing delivery and infrastructure backlogs, he said. “The ANC will need the support of other political parties to achieve this and will no doubt dangle some carrots to lure them. “The ANC is at a crossroads. To survive it needs to put its best cadres forward for if, it doesn’t, the ANC in eThekwini will surely die,” Reddy said. ANC eThekwini regional secretary Musa Nciki, who said he was tasked with engaging the opposition parties, said they would release a statement once the negotiations had been finalised. He said as far as they were aware, Mavundla was removed as deputy mayor but had not left the bloc and as such the voting numbers had not been affected. He added that he was not aware of any meeting planned with the bloc for this week. THE MERCURY