Durban – Two illegal firearms found on a suspect are suspected of having been used in the murder cases around Clermont. That was according to Durban metro police service spokesperson Senior Superintendent Boysie Zungu. Zungu said that on Saturday the metro police crime prevention unit arrested a 32-year-old man for the possession of two illegal firearms and ammunition. He said that the suspect was arrested in December for a business robbery. “These two firearms (handguns) that were found in his possession are suspected to be used in the murder cases around Clermont,” Zungu said. He added that the suspect was processed at the KwaDabeka police station.  Meanwhile, on Friday, KwaZulu-Natal Department of Transport, Community Safety and Liaison MEC Sipho Hlomuka called on police to tighten their grip when dealing with criminals in the province.  This followed an incident in which unknown suspects shot six people and two of them died at the scene. The incident occurred at Zazi Road opposite the Boxer store in Clermont, eThekwini. The deceased were identified as Siyanda Matabela, 23, and Kwanele Ngomazulu, 24 years. Among the shot were Martha Langa, 34, Sphiwe Maduna, 30, Sipho Mwawa, 23, and one unknown in his thirties, who was a few metres away from the scene. They all sustained wounds from a stray bullet. “I am pleased to report that already a team of senior police members at district level, led by Brigadier Cele, is working on this case.  “These are premeditated murders; I would like to call upon the police to work around the clock and ensure that these criminals have their day in court the soonest.  “I will be meeting with General Nhlanhla Mkhwanazi and his team to receive an update on this incident, including other cases of this nature, and hopefully an arrest would have been made,” Hlomuka said. He also condemned the incident in which an ambulance was hijacked and a man was killed in the process, the ambulance has yet to be recovered. He also sent condolences to the families of the deceased and wished a speedy recovery for those who sustained gunshot wounds. Hlomuka was concerned about unlicensed firearms in the province and in the eThekwini Metro. He encouraged the stop and search of vehicles, especially those without registration numbers, police visibility and integrated operations by JCPS cluster departments. He also placed emphasis on the “great role” that can be played by private security companies in curbing these crimes. The department said that KwaDabeka police were investigating three cases of murder and three cases of attempted murder, while Pinetown police were investigating one murder case. The motive for the murders was yet known and no arrest had been made, the department said. On Friday, the Daily News reported that two of the victims, who sold cow heads for a living, were shot at their roadside stalls, while another was shot nearby in an internet café after he tried to escape the unknown gunmen. Daily News