Durban – KwaZulu-Natal political parties have begun making their 2023 New Year’s resolutions and statements.  Inkatha Freedom Party president and KwaZulu-Natal MPL Velenkosini Hlabisa said his party extended their well wishes to all South Africans and the people of the world. Hlabisa said the New Year brought with it the promise of hope and change. He called for grassroots activism on the journey to the 2024 elections. He said the IFP would undertake a full-scale assessment of service delivery in all IFP-governed municipalities, using the 10-point plan in its 2021 manifesto as a yardstick. The 2024 national and provincial elections were ones that would make or break South Africa.  “While we start 2023 with optimism, we must also be realistic and honest in admitting that South Africa is in dire straits. I will be embarking on a nationwide tour to meet the people: from village to village, township to township and city to city; to hear the forgotten voices and to unearth the wealth of wisdom,” Hlabisa said. ANC spokesperson Pule Mabe said they were committed to increasing the pace of renewing the movement to serve people faster, better and more effectively.  “The task ahead requires that we foster unity both in action and in deeds. In 2023, we will once more redouble our efforts to realise the noble promise of a better life for all,” Mabe ended. Economic Freedom Fighter’s spokesperson Lee-Ann Mathys said 2022 had been filled with continued hardships, with unemployment levels in South Africa among the highest in the world.  ”The cost of living became unbearable as food and fuel prices increased. Racist attacks and violence by men against women and children remained persistent. Let us all cross over into the New Year with avid commitment and resilience,“ she said.  The Democratic Alliance’s John Steenhuisen said the country was on the cusp of big political change that could unlock South Africa’s untapped potential.  “I ask that you use 2023 to picture this potential. Try to imagine what South Africa could look like if we were just able to change a number of critical things. If we were to reduce our high crime numbers; bring down the cost of food; prioritise our children’s education, safety and nutrition; and, build a state with qualified people capable of delivering these things. I assure you we can achieve all of these things,” Steenhuisen said.  The United Democratic Movement’s Bantu Holomisa said one-party dominance had to come to an end by 2024.  “The Zondo Commission findings have vindicated this view. It is only then that the economy, lawlessness, corruption, load shedding [and] fair employment policies will be addressed in this country,” he said.  Daily News