Durban – The MEC for Sport, Arts and Culture Amanda Bani-Mapena has urged teachers, parents and those who look after young children to teach them the culture of reading, and also to promote reading in general. Bani-Mapena said this should be encouraged even more as the country commemorates the World Read Aloud Day at an opening of KwaNtunjambili Community Library, near Kwanskop, Maphumulo on Saturday. Attending the opening was South African storyteller and children’s book writer Dr Gcina Mhlophe, local Inkosi Nkosinathi Bhengu, Ilembe District Municipality Speaker councillor Dolly Shandu and the members of the community. Stalwart story teller Dr Gcina Mhlophe narrated the story of ‘Itshe likaNtunjambili’ (colloquially known by different other names like the Rock of Two-Hole or Kranskop Peak) – a legendary tale about the swallows and the cannibals and the girl. “I am invoking this story because it is one of those that ignited the culture of reading in me. We are here because we love books, because we love reading and because we want you to experience the joy of books, and the joy of reading while you are still young. “Books are the foundation of many of our institutions. They are what one author called our 'fixed capital',” Mhlophe said. Ilembe Speaker Dolly Shandu said KwaNtunjambili Library heralds a new trajectory for the rural community near Kranskop. He added that it was one of the projects that would change the cultural profile of the area. “This gave me great hope in our endeavour to deliver quality public infrastructure which represents the department’s new approach in architectural excellence that seeks to level the field for the delivery of the fully-fledged facilities that go beyond being just libraries, but centres of community service.” Inkosi Bhengu said that libraries provide an important resource to neighbouring schools who benefit through the valuable collection of books, computers, internet connectivity and other library services. Since its inception, the library has responded to the needs of the area and has increased its supply of isiZulu books and juvenile fiction, as well as reference material needed by its users. The Ntunjambili modular library services two high schools, three primary schools and five early-childhood development centres – it cost the department R3.7 million to build. WhatsApp your views on this story at 071 485 7995 Daily News