Durban – The National Freedom Party (NFP) may not be able to fire and replace a ‘rebel’ Zululand councillor because of the ongoing legal battle within the factions in the party. Speaking to the “Daily News” on Thursday, the Independent Electoral Commission spokesperson in KwaZulu-Natal Thabani Ngwira said the IEC wrote to the NFP factions informing them that because of the dispute they were involved in, the electoral body was not recognising any faction. Ngwira said that since the NFP had not resolved its internal problems, the party would not be able to declare any councillor’s seat vacant. “Nothing has changed since we informed the NFP factions of our decision last year. You will recall that we wrote to them where we made it clear that there was no recognised leadership, therefore the IEC would not allow any faction to submit any name for councillor’s position until all legal issues have been settled,” said Ngwira. NFP secretary-general Canaan Mdletshe said the disciplinary processes against councillor Berthuel Nxumalo would continue as the party had announced on Wednesday.  He said the party was aware that the IEC had issues of compliance with the party but the leadership was attending to this and would soon be meeting with the IEC to see how the issues could be resolved. There was drama in the Zululand district municipality on Tuesday during the voting for deputy mayor when Nxumalo openly defied his party and voted for the IFP coalition. IFP, with its coalition partner, the DA, needed one vote to retain the municipality as it was tied with the ANC, NFP and EFF coalition – both coalitions had 18 votes, leaving Nxumalo to cast the decisive vote. He chose the IFP instead of his party.  He and the IFP had apparently capitalised on the IEC letter and Pietermaritzburg High Court decision which in 2021 declared Mdletshe’s leadership unlawful. The court had set aside the elective conference that took place in 2019 where Mdletshe and his executive were elected.  The order prompted the IEC to refuse to recognise any NFP faction and to withhold its funds. This also resulted in the party not being able to fill its vacant councillor post in the Abaqulusi local municipality after the resignation of the councillor last year.