Durban - A Management Accounting student and entrepreneur, Asanda Zondi is thrilled after Spar Selgro Centre in Pietermaritzburg agreed to stock her dish washing liquid, Siqalosisha. Zondi, 21, who is studying at the Durban University of Technology (DUT), said she was grateful for the opportunity to collaborate with the Spar Selgro Centre and cannot wait to supply the store with more products. “I am grateful to have had this opportunity, access to market has been my biggest challenge since I started this journey. It took hard work, never giving up, a lot of advertising and putting myself and my business out there to make the right connections,” she said. The young entrepreneur from uMlazi established her company, Siqalosisha in August 2021. It manufactures several cleaning products including bleach, dish washing liquid, washing powder and other cleaning detergents. She said her company produces over 100 units per month and is currently operating with four employees. Her business is being incubated in the innobiz DUT Centre for Entrepreneurship and Innovation where she is receiving business mentorship, business compliance support, technical skills training, industry specific training, personal development and seed funding. The DUT student said when she saw a gap in the local market for hygiene products, she decided it was time to make her dream of having her own business a reality.   “I have always had a passion for entrepreneurship, and to provide quality hygiene products that people can use in their daily lives for maximum hygiene, to protect themselves and their families. “When the Covid-19 pandemic hit, I saw a gap in the sector and decided to turn my idea into an existing business,” said Zondi. Zondi said the training, entrepreneurial guidance and support from the  innobiz DUT Centre for Entrepreneurship and Innovation had been invaluable. “I went to the centre with a vision, and they helped turn it into a reality through mentorship, pitching support and seed funding to start, the organisation was my first chance at success in entrepreneurship,” she said. Nontokozo Ngcobo, manager of the Innobiz DUT Centre, congratulated Zondi. “It is encouraging and exciting to see the skills and tools we provide to our students being used towards the success of their businesses, we congratulate Siqalosisha and we encourage other students as well to use their negotiation skills as entrepreneurs to accelerate their businesses. Furthermore, I would like to congratulate the team who work tirelessly to ensure our students have all the skills they need to thrive in the business world,” said Ngcobo. THE MERCURY