Durban - Tension is mounting between the metro police unit and their counterparts in the eThekwini Municipality’s VIP security unit over allegations that the metro police are taking over their duties of providing protection for the city’s councillors. Members of the VIP unit said they were tasked with the responsibility of protecting the city’s VIPs and councillors under threat, but their duties were now being performed by metro police. However, the city yesterday denied the existence of any tension, saying the two units were getting along. The members of the VIP security went to the Durban City Hall yesterday to meet the Speaker of council, Thabani Nyawose, to complain about the matter. “We met with Speaker Nyawose and he told us this was beyond his power, and he would be calling for a meeting with the city manager, mayor Mxolisi Kaunda and the deputy city manager for community services Dr Musa Gumede,” said a security official, who declined to be named. The official said the security unit had always been responsible for VIP protection and protection of the councillors under threat, but during the tenure of former mayor Zandile Gumede, the metro police took over those duties. The source alleged the situation came to a head this past weekend after the VIP security was assigned to protect another city VIP but metro police stepped in and took over. “Members from the VIP security dropped off the official at her home, then dropped her off at City Hall on Monday and that was the last they had any interaction with her. During the day, metro police had apparently taken over their work and taken her home, leaving the members of the security VIP unit standing there at City Hall.” The source described the situation as tense, adding that there were about 150 members of the security unit who had been sidelined by metro police. “The city is failing to handle this issue, it is increasingly dangerous because both groups are armed. Metro is busy with the work of the VIP security instead of doing their job: fighting crime. The city is dangerous, there is crime, it’s overrun by homeless people. This encroaching should not have been allowed.” The source added that the VIP security members were also losing out on overtime, stating that some were having their assets repossessed because they were no longer able to earn extra income as they had before. When asked to explain the source of the conflict between the two security units, Musa Gumede refused to comment and referred the matter to the speaker. Municipal spokesperson Msawakhe Mayisela denied any tension, saying that like any organisation, staff members met to deliberate on a variety of issues, including security management. “These meetings are internal and their agenda cannot therefore be shared with the members of the media because of their sensitivity as they have got to do with the lives of city officials and political leadership. “As far as we know, both units that you have alluded to have got a good working relationship and they are always distinguishing themselves in discharging their responsibilities. As a result, this is news to us, and we are not going to allow disinformation to drive a wedge between the two units,” he said. THE MERCURY