Durban - eThekwini mayor Mxolisi Kaunda was spared the embarrassment of a no-confidence vote on his leadership yesterday when opposition parties called for the motion to be tabled at a meeting where all councillors would be physically present. The decision was taken at yesterday’s chaotic virtual council sitting where opposition parties raised fears of possible manipulation of council processes by the ANC. This means that the motion will now be tabled and debated at the next in-person meeting to be called by Council speaker Thabani Nyawose. The motion had been formulated and was set for tabling by Active Citizens Coalition councillor, Imtiaz Syed. In the motion, Syed cited a string of matters which he argued, amounted to poor leadership from the mayor and had seen the city’s fortunes declining over the past months. He said the service-delivery failures attributed to Kaunda included: The councillor insisted that the challenges demonstrated an absence of leadership and warranted an urgent motion of no confidence in Kaunda. DA councillor Thabani Mthethwa revealed that he had written two letters to the speaker for the council sitting to be physical, because the matter was both urgent and serious. According to opposition parties, it was important to have a proper record of the number of councillors who had attended the meeting, and those who had voted in favour of the motion, and this was only possible when everyone attended at one venue. Responding to yesterday’s development at the council meeting, the ANC in the eThekwini region said it had noted the postponement of the tabling of the motion of no confidence in the mayor. ANC regional spokesperson Mlondi Mkhize described the motion as a “stunt” that would not succeed. “It is our fervent belief that the motion is nothing but a public relations exercise aimed at pitting the mayor against the people of eThekwini. It won’t succeed,” he said. The spokesperson insisted that the ANC in eThekwini was committed to run an activist council that had strong oversight responsibility. ActionSA councillor Zwakele Mncwango said: “We believe that if you allow councillors to vote with their conscience, that we might have an outcome that reflects the will of the people of eThekwini and not that of the ANC and its sympathisers. “We believe that Mayor Kaunda has failed the people of eThekwini.” There has been a great deal of interest around Kaunda’s future in the city recently, with rumours that he may be headed back to the KZN Legislature, especially after former premier and Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs MEC Sihle Zikalala announced his resignation this week. THE MERCURY