Durban - The ANC in KwaZulu-Natal is set to do an audit of all its elected representatives, from members of the provincial legislature to municipal councillors, in order to remove all non-performers – this amid growing disapproval of the ruling party among the electorate. Addressing ANC members at the party’s 111th birthday celebrations in Hammarsdale yesterday for the first time since being elected last year, ANC KZN chairperson Siboniso Duma said the provincial leadership had come across complaints about the performance of some ANC members in public institutions. The gathering was attended by the ruling party’s rank-and-file and top brass, including ANC secretary-general Fikile Mbalula and NEC members Bheki Cele and Zweli Mkhize. Duma warned that members of the public were growing increasingly agitated by the conduct of some party members who used the public office to enrich themselves. “We have heard of people who engage in endless partying when they should be serving members of the public. Through this assessment, we will determine who is and is not using the public office to perform tasks that were given to them by the ANC,” Duma told the gathering. While it is not clear when the assessment would start, it is believed it will result in shake-ups both in the legislature and municipalities as the ruling party attempts to polish its image ahead of next year’s elections. The move is in line with the ruling party’s theme that 2023 is a year of firm decisions. Duma also gave an assurance that the ANC rank-and-file in KZN was fully behind President Cyril Ramaphosa and his leadership collective, and would support him throughout his term. “We want to say this unapologetically: as KwaZulu-Natal, we had endorsed Comrade Zweli Mkhize as our preferred candidate for president, and the conference elected Comrade Cyril Ramaphosa. The elective conference is over and done with, and we are committed to supporting the leadership that was elected recently,” Duma said.   He conceded that people were increasingly losing hope amid a host of challenges, including load shedding and water-related problems, but committed to getting these attended to. In addition to this, Duma told the crowd that the ANC was focused on reopening many of the factories in townships that had closed in recent times. Mbalula said the ANC had decided to be hands-on with the country’s energy crisis after realising the inconsistent messages from Eskom bosses. “We came to a realisation that we would be told one story about load shedding, which we would tell our people, only for the story to change overnight. We were made to look like fools and liars, and that is why we have opted to be hands-on regarding the crisis,” said Mbalula. He cautioned against complaints that the government had not done anything, but admitted there were challenges. “It is not fair to hear a person saying the government has done nothing when they speak from an RDP house built by the government,” Mbalula told the crowd. He said the ruling party was serious about taking firm decisions when they were needed, including removing non-performers from public office. THE MERCURY